Title: MAAS | Physical Zones
TODO:  There are too many words on this page


# Physical zones

To help you maximise fault-tolerance and performance of the services you
deploy, MAAS administrators can define *physical zones* (or just *zones* for
short), and assign nodes to them. When a user requests a node, they can ask for
one that is in a specific zone, or one that is not in a specific zone.

It's up to you as an administrator to decide what a physical zone should
represent: it could be a server rack, a room, a data centre, machines attached
to the same UPS, or a portion of your network. Zones are most useful when they
represent portions of your infrastructure. But you could also use them simply
to keep track of where your systems are located.

Each node is in one and only one physical zone. Each MAAS instance ships with a
default zone to which nodes are attached by default. If you do not need this
feature, you can simply pretend it does not exist.

Since you run your own MAAS, the physical zones feature gives you more
flexibility than those of a third-party hosted cloud service. That means that
you get to design your zones and define what they mean. Below are some examples
of how physical zones can help you get the most out of your MAAS.


## Applications

Since you run your own MAAS, its physical zones give you more flexibility than
those of a third-party hosted cloud service. That means that you get to design
your zones and define what they mean. Below are some examples of how physical
zones can help you get the most out of your MAAS.

### Fault tolerance

If you are concerned about availability of services you deploy through MAAS, a
physical zone could be on one power supply, or it could be an entire data
centre location, or an area of your network that is unlikely to suffer problems
when another zone experiences an outage.

For example, you might roll out separate instances of the same web application
into different physical zones of the same MAAS, and either load-balance between
them or keep one as a warm stand-by. If one zone suffers a power loss, is cut
off from the internet, or is affected by a natural disaster, the other instance
of your application may still be available in the other zone, and ready to take
over.

For fault tolerance, machines that work together in order to provide one
instance of a service should generally be allocated in the same zone. The
entire service should have a backup instance in another zone.

### Performance

Even if fault tolerance is not an issue, you may still want to divide your
nodes into groups that communicate efficiently through a high-performance local
network, or share efficient access to external resources.

When it comes to performance, machines should generally be allocated in the
zone closest to performance-critical resources they need.

For example, for applications that are highly sensitive to network latency, it
may make sense to divide your MAAS into smaller physical networks, and
represent each of those networks as a physical zone. Now, you can use the
physical zones to allocate nodes just where they get the best performance when
communicating with specific other nodes.

In another example, your application may rely on a third-party service
available on the internet. If your MAAS is spread out across multiple data
centre locations, you may want the application to be deployed in the location
with the best access to that service.

### Power management

If you are concerned about power density and cooling, you can lay out your
physical zones to match server racks. Instead of allocating machines that share
a physical zone, you can spread out the load by ensuring that "hot" systems are
in located different zones.


## Creating a zone

Only administrators can create and manage zones. To create a physical zone in
the web user interface, log in as an administrator and browse to the "Zones"
section in the top bar. This will takes you to the zones listing page. At the
bottom of the page is a button for creating a new zone:

![image](../../media/add-zone.png)


## Assigning nodes to a zone

Once you have created one or more physical zones, you can set nodes' zones from
the nodes listing page in the UI. Select the nodes for which you wish to set a
zone, and choose "Set physical zone" from the "Bulk action" dropdown list near
the top. A second dropdown list will appear, to let you select which zone you
wish to set. Leave it blank to clear nodes' physical zones. Clicking "Go" will
apply the change to the selected nodes.

You can also set an individual node's zone on its "Edit node" page. Both ways
are available in the API as well: edit an individual node through a `PUT`
request to the node's URI, or set the zone on multiple nodes at once by calling
the `set_zone` operation on the `nodes` endpoint.


## Allocating a node in a zone

To deploy in a particular zone, call the `acquire` method in the
region-controller API \<region-controller-api\> as before, but pass the `zone`
parameter with the name of the zone. The method will allocate a node in that
zone, or fail with an HTTP 409 ("conflict") error if the zone has no nodes
available that match your request.

Alternatively, you may want to request a node that is *not* in a particular
zone, or one that is not in any of several zones. To do that, specify the
`not_in_zone` parameter to `acquire`. This parameter takes a list of zone
names; the allocated node will not be in any of them. Again, if that leaves no
nodes available that match your request, the call will return a "conflict"
error.

It is possible, though not usually useful, to combine the `zone` and
`not_in_zone` parameters. If your choice for `zone` is also present in
`not_in_zone`, no node will ever match your request. Or if it's not, then the
`not_in_zone` values will not affect the result of the call at all.
